<h1>Impacts of an introduced ascidian on rocky shore communities</h1>

Javier Atalah<br>
Cawthron Institute, Private Bag 2, Nelson 7010, New Zealand<br>
javier.atalah@cawthron.org.nz<br>

The number and distribution of non-indigenous species in coastal habitats is increasing. Our ability to prioriotise the management of this threat is limited by our understanding of how species behave in novel environments and how they impact native species. We investigated the impact of the non-indigenous solitary sea squirt, <i>Pyura doppelgangera</i> on natural and economic values of rocky intertidal habitats. A field-based experiment was conducted to investigate: 1) the effect of <i>P. doppelgangera</i> on the green-lipped mussel (<i>Perna canaliculus</i>), an iconic and key rocky-shore native species within the low intertidal zone; and 2) on the establishment of rocky shore assemblages within patches of differing <i>P. doppelgangera</i> densities. After 1.5 experimental years we found marginal differences in intertidal community development on cleared plots within Pyura patches of low and high cover (20 and 70%, respectively) and controls, with small increases in diversity associate to Pyura plots. There was minimal recruitment of Pyura within cleared plots throughout the experiment. Green-lipped mussel transplanted within patches of low and high <i>P. doppelgangera</i> cover, did not show changes in condition or any sign of overgrowth by the sea squirt. Undisturbed plots showed no evidence of inter-specific space competition between <i>P. canaliculus</i> and <i>P. doppelgangera</i> through time, with population dynamics most likely mediated by physical stress induced by wave action. Collectively, our research showed that P. doppelgangera is not an aggressive competitor nor a threat to green-lipped mussel beds in the area, as previously thought, and that it has a very limited natural recruitment and spread potential. Finally, Mātauranga Māori indicates that Pyura has been present in the area for longer than previously thought, raising questions about its ‘introduction’ status and its current designation as an unwanted species.

<b>Keywords</b>: <i>Pyura doppelgangera</i>, <i>Perna canaliculus</i>,tunicates, New Zealand, non-indigenous species, impacts, intertidal
